Exodus chapters 1-6 from the Holy Bible, King James Version.
The Holy Bible, King James Version.
The second book of Moses, called Exodus, chapter 1.
Now these are the names of the children of Israel which came into Egypt, every man and
his household came with Jacob. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob
were seventy souls, for Joseph was in Egypt already. And Joseph died, and all his brethren,
and all that generation. And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly,
and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them. Now there
arose up a new king over Egypt which knew not Joseph. And he said unto his people, Behold
the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we. Come on, let us deal
wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falleth out
any war they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of
the land. Therefore they did set over them task-masters to afflict them with their burdens,
and they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pitham, and Ramses. But the more they afflicted
them the more they multiplied, and grew, and they were grieved because of the children
of Israel. And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor, and they made
their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service
in the field. All their service wherein they made them serve was with rigor. And the king
of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shifra, and
the name of the other Pua. And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew
women, and see them upon the stools, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him, but if it
be a daughter, then she shall live. But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king
of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men-children alive. And the king of Egypt called for the
midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men-children
alive? And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian
women, for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. Therefore
God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.
And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses. And
Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river,
and every daughter ye shall save alive.
CHAPTER II
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi. And the
woman conceived, and bare a son. And when she saw him, that he was a goodly child, she
hid him three months. And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime, and with pitch, and put the child therein, and she
laid it in the flags by the river's bank. And his sister stood afar off to wit what
would be done to him. And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river,
and her maidens walked along by the river's side, and when she saw the ark among the flags
she sent her maid to fetch it. And when she had opened it she saw the child, and behold
the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go, and call to thee a nurse of the
Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? And Pharaoh's daughter said to her,
Go. And the maid went, and called the child's mother. And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her,
Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman
took the child, and nursed it. And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter,
and he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and she said, Because I drew him
out of the water. And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out
and looked on their burdens, and he spied an Egyptian smiting in Hebrew one of his brethren.
And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the
Egyptian and hid him in the sand. And when he went out the second day, behold two men
of the Hebrews strove together, and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest
thou thy fellow? And he said, Whom made thee a prince and a judge over us? Intendest thou
to kill me, as thou killest the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing
is known. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses, but Moses fled from
the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian, and he sat down by a well. Now
the priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came and drew water, and filled the
troughs to water their father's flock. And the shepherds came and drove them away, but
Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. And when they came to rule their
father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to-day? And they said, An Egyptian
delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered
their flock. And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? Why is it that ye have left
the man? Call him, that he may eat bread. And Moses was content to dwell with the man,
and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter. And she bare him a son, and he called his name
Gershom, for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land. And it came to pass in
the process of time that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the
bondage. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham,
with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect
unto them.
CHAPTER III
Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock
to the back side of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb. And the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, and he
looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses said,
I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord
saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and
said, Moses, Moses! And he said, Here am I! And he said, Draw not nigh hither, put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where I'll now standest is holy ground. Moreover,
he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob. And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry by reason of their task-masters, for I know their sorrows, and
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land, unto a good land, at a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey, unto
the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and
the Hivites, and the Jebusites. Now therefore behold the cry of the children of Israel is
come unto me, and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppressed them. Come
now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people,
the children of Israel, out of Egypt.
And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should
bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? And he said, Certainly I will be with
thee, and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee. When thou hast brought
forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say
unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they shall say to me, What
is his name? What shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I am that I am. And
he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I am, hath sent me unto you.
And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The
Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath
sent me unto you. This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited
you and seen that which has done to you in Egypt. And I have said, I will bring you up
out of the affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
Samarites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with
milk and honey. And they shall hearken to thy voice, and thou shalt come, thou and the
elders of Israel, unto the King of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of
the Hebrews hath met with us. And now let us go, we beseech thee, three days journey
into the wilderness, though it may sacrifice to the Lord our God.
And I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.
And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do
in the midst thereof, and after that he will let you go. And I will give this people favor
in the sight of the Egyptians, and it shall come to pass that when ye go ye shall not
go empty. But every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of her that sojourneth in
her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and ye shall put them upon
your sons and upon your daughters, and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
CHAPTER IV
And Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice,
for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. And the Lord said unto him, What
is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod. And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he
cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent, and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord
said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his
hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand. That they may believe that the Lord
God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob hath
appeared unto thee. And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom.
And he put his hand into his bosom. And when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous
as snow. And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into
his bosom again, and plucked it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as
his other flesh. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken
to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken
unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the
dry land, and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the
dry land. And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither hew to
for, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant, but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth, or who maketh the dumb, or deaf,
or the seeing, or the blind? Have not I the Lord? Now therefore go, and I will be with
thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say. And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray,
thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well,
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee, and when he seeth thee, he will be glad
in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth, and I will be
with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be
thy spokesman unto the people, and he shall be, even he shall be to thee, instead of a
mouth, and thou shalt be to him, instead of God. And thou shalt take this rod in thine
hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.
And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said unto him, Let me go,
I pray thee, and return unto my brethren, which are in Egypt, and see whether they be
yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian,
Go, return into Egypt, for all the men are dead which sought thy life. And Moses took
his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt,
and Moses took the rod of God in his hand. And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest
to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh which I have put
in thine hand. But I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go. And
thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn.
And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me. And if thou refuse to let him
go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.
And it came to pass, by the way, in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill
him. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast
it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. So he let him go,
then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.
And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in
the mount of God, and kissed him. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had
sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went, and gathered
together all the elders of the children of Israel. And Aaron spake all the words which
the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs and the sight of the people. And the
people believed, that when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel,
and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads, and worshipped.
CHAPTER V
And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,
Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.
And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us. Let us go, we pray thee, three
days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us
with pestilence or with the sword.
And the King of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from
their works? Get you unto your burdens.
And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from
their burdens.
And Pharaoh commanded the same day the task-masters of the people and their officers, saying,
Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore. Let them go and
gather straw for themselves. And the tail of the bricks, which they did make heretofore,
ye shall lay upon them. Ye shall not diminish aught thereof, for they be idle. Therefore
they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
Let their more work be laid upon the men that they may labor therein, and let them not regard
vain words.
And the task-masters of the people went out and their officers, and they spake to the
people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw. Go ye, get you straw,
where you can find it. Yet not aught of your work shall be diminished.
So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead
of straw. And the task-masters hasted them, saying, Fulfill your works, your daily tasks,
as when there was straw. And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's
task-masters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled
your task in making brick, both yesterday and to-day, as heretofore?
Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore
dealest thou thus with thy servants? There is no straw given unto thy servants, and
they say to us, Make brick, and behold, thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine
own people.
But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the
Lord. Go therefore now and work, for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye
deliver the tale of bricks.
And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after
it was said, Ye shall not diminish aught from your bricks of your daily task.
And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh.
And they said unto them, The Lord look upon you and judge, because ye have made our savor
to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword
in their hand to slay us.
And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou so evil and treated
this people? Why is it that thou hast sent me? For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in
thy name, he hath done evil to this people, neither hast thou delivered thy people at
all.
CHAPTER VI
Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh, for with a
strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his
land.
And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord. And I appeared unto Abraham,
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I
not known to them. And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land
of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers. And I have also heard
the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have
remembered my covenant. Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and
I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of
their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments,
and I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
And I will bring you in unto the land concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, and I will give it you for an heritage. I am the Lord.
And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel, but they hearken not unto Moses for anguish
of spirit, and for cruel bondage. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Go in, speak
unto Pharaoh, King of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land. And
Moses spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened
unto me. How then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? And the Lord spake
unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and
unto Pharaoh, King of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
These be the heads of their fathers' houses, the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel,
Hanukkah, and Palu, Hezran, and Carmi. These be the families of Reuben. And the sons of
Simeon, Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jaqen, and Zohar, and Sheul, the son of a Canaanitish
woman. These are the families of Simeon. And these are the names of the sons of Levi according
to their generations, Gershon, and Kohath, and Mirari. And the years of the life of Levi
were 130 and 7 years. The sons of Gershon, Libni, and Shimei, according to their families.
And the sons of Kohath, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uziol. And the years of the
life of Kohath were 130 and 3 years. And the sons of Mirari, Mehalai, and Mushai. These
are the families of Levi according to their generations. And Amram took Jacobed, his father's
sister, to wife, and she bared him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram
were 130 and 7 years. And the sons of Izhar, Korah, and Nefeg, and Zikrai. And the sons
of Uziol, Maishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithrai. And Aaron took him Elishaba, daughter of
Minadab, sister of Neishan, to wife. And she bared him Nadab, and Abihu, Eliezer, and Ithamar.
And the sons of Korah, Aser, and Alkena, and Abiasif. These are the families of the Korheites.
And Eliezer, Aaron's son, took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife. And she bared
him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
These are that Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel
from the land of Egypt according to their armies. These are they which spake to Pharaoh,
King of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and
Aaron. And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt
that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I am the Lord, speak thou unto Pharaoh, King
of Egypt, all that I say unto thee. And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?